My second day as a software developer apprentice at Pragmint started like any other. However, early in the day, I was asked to prepare for my first mock consulting meeting for a company named Tic-Tac-Toe Industries. They needed a game for their upcoming tic-tac-toe tournament. In preparation, I began thinking of all the questions I could think to ask, “Would you like the board to be 3 x 3?”, “Should the game support more than 2 players?”, and of course “When do you need it by?”. After some time, I had a full page of questions and was ready for the meeting.

The CEO of Pragmint has a Boonie hat that he puts on to let me know that he is no longer the CEO of Pragmint, but instead the client. When meeting time came, I entered the room and there he was, the client that is. I started with a greeting and went straight to my questions, asking all about his vision for the game. After about 15 min and with the help of the white board, I felt I had a good grasp of what the client wanted for the upcoming tic tac toe tournament. But then…the client asked, “What is your process for communication?”. Silly enough, I had no idea what to say. The client then poofed out of existence and the Pragmint CEO poofed in. We reflected on the experience and he pointed out questions I was missing. Given this was a real client, and without intervention, I would have started the relationship with a false understanding of all the pieces at play and as a result, given false expectations. What about the tournament? Is the tournament online or in-person? How many players are expected to be in the tournament? Will players need to register? Is ‘x’ feature absolutely needed? And furthermore, what is my process for communication? Can I really deliver the clients complex vision in the given amount of time? Does the client feel confident about hiring me?

I went into the meeting only thinking about the tic-tac-toe game, but what about the larger picture. Without answers to the above questions, success would have been a coincidence. How else would I get an understanding of the scoop of the project, prioritize what’s essential, communicate realistic expectation per the timeline, and set up check in’s for demos and continuous feedback? I also didn’t communicate how the game will start at a low fidelity state and move into a high fidelity state. So, with a broader understanding of what the client and I should be getting out of the meeting, we reset and I prepared more questions.

The second round of the Pragmint mock consulting meeting went well and to my surprise, the vision of the game changed. I felt that I was asking more of the right questions and in return, developed a better sense of all the pieces for the project. Overall, I feel as though I have a stronger grasp on what a successful consulting meeting looks like and what the client and I should be getting out of it. With anything, practice makes perfect.

Based on my experiences from my apprenticeship at Pragmint. https://pragmint.com/