I’ve been working for Tic Tac Toe Industries for close to two weeks and have meet with the client a handful of times. The Speed Tic Tac Toe Tournament is taking place this Wednesday and the project is due on Tuesday, which is tomorrow. The good news is the project is mostly complete with only 1 of 18 tickets remaining. However, I’ve made thoughtless project commitments that have costed me a good amount of overhead time. How did I find my self in this position?

Well, it all started in the first consulting meeting. After the game details were discussed, I was asked by the client if I could complete the discussed anatomy of the Tic Tac Toe game in two weeks for the tournament. I said yes… This was a poor decision. How did I know I could complete the game in two weeks? Did I realistically think about what it would take to complete all things the client was asking? Also keep in mind that I’m creating the game in React and NextJS, which are new technologies for me. I was surrounded by uncertainty and due to whatever force, I said I could complete the project in two weeks. Now, I want to make a clear distinction. It’s one thing to be well equipped with information and to take bold steps into some level of uncertainty, but it's entirely another thing to have next to no context about the technologies and to commit to a full grocery list of features without really having any clue to what each grocery item takes to complete. So saying yes to the client when he asked me if I could have everything completed in two weeks was a poor decision. A better approach would to have gathered as much information on the first meeting and conduct another meeting to discuss what can most likely be completed in the given time frame, giving me time to think through the grocery list of tasks and reduce the amount of uncertainty. Perhaps a PERT chart would have been handy in quantifying uncertainty. All in all, just take the time to think.

What happens when there is little time to think, what is the best course of action? During some Tic Tac Toe Industry client meetings, I have been asked, “What do you suggest?” for forks in the road. I could have said, “Let me get back to you” but that gets old quick. I am the expert after all. This scenario is best prepared for IN ADVANCE. The more one knows their craft and the clients domain, the more confident one can be at offering credible suggestions. Prepare for these moments by diving into to the clients domain. Think about where the project is and where it’s going, where it could go. Think about what it’s like to be a customer. Sign up and become a member of the customers product for first hand experiences. It’s also important to continue learning the technical aspects of your craft.

Uncertainty can also crop up in communication with the client. In my last Tic Tac Toe Industries meeting, I was giving a demo on the progress of the game. During the demo, the client stopped me as he had other expectations for a given feature. Instead of STOPPING and addressing the concern to offer alternatives, I glossed over the concern and only reconfirmed how I designed it. This most likely did many things, including leaving the client in a space of uncertainty. Don’t leave others in uncertainty and do your best to provide context and professional suggestions.

There will always be a level of uncertainty in software delivery, so it’s important to learn to navigate the unknown. To reduce uncertainty, take the time to prepare and address questions boldly.

Based on my experiences from my apprenticeship at Pragmint. https://pragmint.com/